# DeepCSD

## Colorectal Cancer Subtype Identification from Differential Gene Expression Levels using Minimalist Deep Learning

##Cancer molecular subtyping plays a critical role in individualized patient treatment. In previous studies, high-throughput gene expression signature-based methods have been proposed to identify cancer subtypes. Unfortunately, the existing ones suffer from the curse of dimensionality, data sparsity, and computational deficiency. To address those problems, we propose a computational framework for colorectal cancer subtyping without any exploitation in model complexity and generality. A supervised learning framework based on deep learning (DeepCSD) is proposed to identify cancer subtypes. Specifically, based on the differentially expressed genes under cancer consensus molecular subtyping, we design a minimalist feed-forward neural network to capture the distinct molecular features in different cancer subtypes. To mitigate the overfitting phenomenon of deep learning, L2 regularization and dropout layers are added. For demonstrating the effectiveness of DeepCSD, we compared it with other methods including Random Forest (RF), Deep forest (gcForest), support vector machine (SVM), XGBoost, and DeepCC on eight independent colorectal cancer datasets. The results reflect that DeepCSD can achieve superior performance over other algorithms. In addition, gene ontology enrichment and pathology analysis are conducted to reveal novel insights into the cancer subtype identification and characterization mechanisms.
